Add Storage Foundation article (#5559)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/storage-foundation/index.md

  supported and is tuned for storing large-sized data such as web application resources, but the
  values are immutable.

The Storage Foundation API is an attempt at closing all the gaps of the previous storage options by
allowing for the performant storage of mutable large files defined within the origin of the
application.

### Suggested use cases for the Storage Foundation API {: #use-cases }

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

- Productivity or creativity apps that operate on large amounts of video, audio, or image data. Such
  apps can offload segments to disk instead of holding them in memory.
- Apps that rely on a persistent filesystem accessible from Wasm and that need more performance than
  what IDBFS can guarantee.

## What is the Storage Foundation API? {: #what }

There are two main parts to the API:

- **File system calls**, which provide basic functionality to interact with files and file paths.
- **File handles**, which provide read and write access to an existing file.

### File system calls

The Storage Foundation API introduces a new interface `storageFoundation` that lives on the `window`
object and that includes a number of functions:

> {% Aside %} We are currently exploring the tradeoffs between providing a synchronous vs. an

Author: I don't think there is a way, but the good thing is that this Aside will eventually go away since it's temporary. There are one or two other such temporary Asides…

asynchronous API. The interfaces are designed to be asynchronous as a temporary measure and will be
updated once a decision has been reached. For more background on the tradeoffs, see the
[Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/storage-foundation-api-explainer#sync-vs-async). {% endAside %}

- `storageFoundation.open(name)`: Opens the file with the given name if it exists and otherwise
  creates a new file. Returns a promise that resolves with the the opened file.

{% Aside 'warning' %} File names are restricted to lowercase alphanumeric characters and underscore
(`a-z`, `0-9`, `_`). {% endAside %}

{% Aside %} A file can only be opened once. This means concurrent access from different tabs is
currently not possible. {% endAside %}

> - `storageFoundation.delete(name)`: Removes the file with the given name. Void.

Author: Thanks. It returns `undefined`, which is what I meant with void. I'll just make it clear.

> - `storageFoundation.delete(name)`: Removes the file with the given name. Void.

Author: ```suggestion
- `storageFoundation.delete(name)`: Removes the file with the given name. Returns `undefined`.
```

- `storageFoundation.rename(oldName, newName)`: Renames the file from the old name to the new name

>   atomically. Void.

Author: ```suggestion
  atomically.  Returns `undefined`.
```

  by the current execution context. Returns a promise that resolved with the remaining amount of
  capacity available.

{% Aside %} The Storage Foundation API achieves fast and predictable performance by implementing its
own quota management system. Web applications must explicitly ask for capacity before storing any
new data. This request will be granted according to the browser's quota guidelines. Anytime an
application starts a new JavaScript execution context (e.g., new tab, new worker, reloading the
page), it must make sure it owns sufficient capacity before writing new data. {% endAside %}

- `storageFoundation.releaseCapacity(toBeReleasedCapacity)`: Releases unused capacity (in bytes)
  from the current execution context. Returns a promised that resolves with the remaining amount of
  capacity available.
- `storageFoundation.getRemainingCapacity()`: Returns a promise that resolves with the capacity
  available for the current execution context.

### File handles

Working with files happens via the following functions:

{% Aside %} Storage Foundation API used to be called NativeIO. Some references to this name still
remain and will be removed eventually. {% endAside %}

> - `NativeIOFile.close()`: Closes a file. Void.

Author: ```suggestion
- `NativeIOFile.close()`: Closes a file.  Returns `undefined`.
```

- `NativeIOFile.flush()`: Synchronizes (that is, flushes) a file's in-core state with the storage

>   device. Void.

Author: ```suggestion
  device.  Returns `undefined`.
```

{% Aside %} It is a known issue that `flush()` might be slow and we are exploring whether offering a
faster, less reliable variant would be useful. {% endAside %}

- `NativeIOFile.getLength()`: Returns a promise that resolves with the length of the file in bytes.
- `NativeIOFile.setLength(length)`: Sets the length of the file in bytes. If the new length is
  smaller than the current length, bytes are removed starting from the end of the file. Otherwise

>   the file is extended with zero-valued bytes. Void.

Author: ```suggestion
  the file is extended with zero-valued bytes.  Returns `undefined`.
```

const file = await storageFoundation.open('test_file');
try {
  // Request 100 bytes of capacity for this context.
  await storageFoundation.requestCapacity(100);

  const writeBuffer = new Uint8Array([64, 65, 66]);
  // Write the buffer at offset 0. After this operation, `result.buffer`
  // contains the transferred buffer and `result.writtenBytes` is 3,
  // the number of bytes written. `writeBuffer` is left detached.
  let result = await file.write(writeBuffer, 0);

  const readBuffer = new Uint8Array(3);
  // Read at offset 1. `result.buffer` contains the transferred buffer,
  // `result.readBytes` is 2, the number of bytes read. `readBuffer` is left
  // detached.
  result = await file.read(readBuffer, 1);
  // `Uint8Array(3) [65, 66, 0]`
  console.log(result.buffer);
} finally {
  file.close();
}
```

#### Opening, listing, deleting

```js
// Open three different files (creating them if needed).
await storageFoundation.open('sunrise');
await storageFoundation.open('noon');
await storageFoundation.open('sunset');
// List all existing files.
// `["sunset", "sunrise", "noon"]`
await storageFoundation.getAll();
// Delete one of the three files.

> await storageFoundation.delete('noon');

Author: @fivedots This example from the explainer actually doesn't work. It fails because the file is open. See https://github.com/WICG/storage-foundation-api-explainer/issues/24 for background.

Send a tweet to [@ChromiumDev][cr-dev-twitter] using the hashtag
[`#StorageFoundation`](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23StorageFoundation&src=recent_search_click&f=live)
and let us know where and how you are using it. Ask a question on StackOverflow with the hashtag
[`#file-system-access-api`](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/file-system-access-api).

## Helpful links {: #helpful }

- [Public explainer][explainer]
- [Storage Foundation API demo][demo] | [Storage Foundation API demo source][demo-source]
- [Chromium tracking bug][cr-bug]
- [ChromeStatus.com entry][cr-status]
- Blink Component: [`Blink>Storage>NativeIO`][blink-component]
- [TAG Review](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/566)
- [Intent to Prototype](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/g/blink-dev/c/gh0gTHO18YQ)
- [WebKit thread](https://lists.webkit.org/pipermail/webkit-dev/2021-February/031687.html)
- [Mozilla thread](https://github.com/mozilla/standards-positions/issues/481)

## Acknowledgements

The Storage Foundation API was specified and implemented by
[Emanuel Krivoy](https://github.com/fivedots) and [Richard Stotz](https://github.com/rstz). This

> article was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley).

Author: ```suggestion
article was reviewed by [Pete LePage](https://github.com/petele) and
[Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley).
```

---
layout: post
title: 'High performance storage for your app: the Storage Foundation API'
subhead: |

>   The Storage Foundation API resembles a very basic filesystem,

Author: OK, will do!

  with direct access to stored data through buffers and offsets. It gives
  developers flexibility by providing generic, simple, and performant 
  primitives upon which they can build higher-level components.
authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2021-06-09

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-06-10
```

# updated: YYYY-MM-DD
description: |
  The Storage Foundation API is a storage API that resembles a basic file system,
  with direct access to stored data through buffers and offsets. It gives
  developers flexibility by providing generic, simple, and performant primitives upon
  which they can build higher-level components. It is particularly well suited for

>   Wasm-based libraries and applications that want to use custom storage algorithms to

Author: ```suggestion
  Wasm-based libraries and applications that perform best when they can use custom storage algorithms to
```

>   Wasm-based libraries and applications that want to use custom storage algorithms to

Author: Now using "applications that perform best when they can use…"

  fine-tune execution speed and memory usage.
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/jHUvdkuNQBLYxfWrCizd.jpg
alt: |
  Hacker binary attack code.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities
origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/2916080758722396161
---

{% Aside %} The Storage Foundation API is part of the
[capabilities project](https://web.dev/fugu-status/) and is currently in development. This post will
be updated as the implementation progresses. {% endAside %}

The web platform increasingly offers developers the tools they need to build fined-tuned
high-performance applications for the web. Most notably,
[WebAssembly](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly) (Wasm) has opened the door to
fast and powerful web applications, while technologies like [Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/)

> now allow developers to reuse tried and tested code on the web. In order to truly leverage this

Author: At this stage I should really use a lint rule to simplify "in order to" to just "to"…

potential, developers must be given the same power and flexibility when it comes to storage.

This is where the Storage Foundation API comes in. The Storage Foundation API is a new fast and

> unopinionated storage API that unlocks new and much-requested use cases for the web, such as

Author: Not enforcing any opinionated approaches to how storage is done.

implementing performant databases and gracefully managing large temporary files. With this new
interface, developers will be able to "bring their own storage" to the web, reducing the feature gap
between web and platform-specific code.

> The Storage Foundation API is designed to resemble a very basic filesystem, aiming to give

Author: ```suggestion
The Storage Foundation API is designed to resemble a very basic filesystem so it gives
```

  a backend for some of the Storage Foundation API's use-cases. For example, Emscripten includes
  [IDBFS](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/Filesystem-API.html), an IndexedDB-based
  persistent file system. However, since IndexedDB is fundamentally a key-value store, it comes with
  significant performance limitations. Furthermore, directly accessing sub-sections of a file is
  even more difficult and slower under IndexedDB.
- Finally, the
  [CacheStorage interface](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/CacheStorage) is widely
  supported and is tuned for storing large-sized data such as web application resources, but the
  values are immutable.

The Storage Foundation API is an attempt at closing all the gaps of the previous storage options by
allowing for the performant storage of mutable large files defined within the origin of the
application.

### Suggested use cases for the Storage Foundation API {: #use-cases }

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

- Productivity or creativity apps that operate on large amounts of video, audio, or image data. Such
  apps can offload segments to disk instead of holding them in memory.

> - Apps that rely on a persistent filesystem accessible from Wasm and that need more performance than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apps that rely on a persistent file system accessible from Wasm and that need more performance than
```

  what IDBFS can guarantee.

## What is the Storage Foundation API? {: #what }

There are two main parts to the API:

- **File system calls**, which provide basic functionality to interact with files and file paths.
- **File handles**, which provide read and write access to an existing file.

### File system calls

> The Storage Foundation API introduces a new interface `storageFoundation` that lives on the `window`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Storage Foundation API introduces a new interface, `storageFoundation` that lives on the `window`
```

> The Storage Foundation API introduces a new interface `storageFoundation` that lives on the `window`

Reviewer: The interface is actually called `NativeIOFileManager`.

Author: Correct. I reword to "object" now, since the `Native*` interface name will disappear. The object's name is final.

object and that includes a number of functions:

> {% Aside %} We are currently exploring the tradeoffs between providing a synchronous vs. an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside %} We are currently exploring the tradeoffs between providing a synchronous versus an
```

asynchronous API. The interfaces are designed to be asynchronous as a temporary measure and will be
updated once a decision has been reached. For more background on the tradeoffs, see the
[Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/storage-foundation-api-explainer#sync-vs-async). {% endAside %}

- `storageFoundation.open(name)`: Opens the file with the given name if it exists and otherwise
  creates a new file. Returns a promise that resolves with the the opened file.

{% Aside 'warning' %} File names are restricted to lowercase alphanumeric characters and underscore
(`a-z`, `0-9`, `_`). {% endAside %}

{% Aside %} A file can only be opened once. This means concurrent access from different tabs is
currently not possible. {% endAside %}

> - `storageFoundation.delete(name)`: Removes the file with the given name. Returns `undefined`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `storageFoundation.delete(name)`: Removes the file with the given name. Returns a promise
  that resolves when the file is deleted.
```

Author: Good catch!

- `storageFoundation.rename(oldName, newName)`: Renames the file from the old name to the new name

>   atomically.  Returns `undefined`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  atomically.  Returns `undefined`.
```
```suggestion
  atomically.  Returns a promise that resolves when the file is renamed.
```

- `storageFoundation.getAll()`: Returns a promise that resolves with an array of all existing file
  names.
- `storageFoundation.requestCapacity(requestedCapacity)`: Requests new capacity (in bytes) for usage
  by the current execution context. Returns a promise that resolved with the remaining amount of
  capacity available.

{% Aside %} The Storage Foundation API achieves fast and predictable performance by implementing its
own quota management system. Web applications must explicitly ask for capacity before storing any
new data. This request will be granted according to the browser's quota guidelines. Anytime an

> application starts a new JavaScript execution context (e.g., new tab, new worker, reloading the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application starts a new JavaScript execution context (e.g., a new tab, a new worker, or reloading the
```

> page), it must make sure it owns sufficient capacity before writing new data. {% endAside %}

Author: ```suggestion
page), it must make sure it owns sufficient capacity before writing any data. {% endAside %}
```

> page), it must make sure it owns sufficient capacity before writing new data. {% endAside %}

Reviewer: >new data

Why not just 'data'? Is there some distinction here I'm missing?

Author: Right, "new" should be replaced with "any".

> - `storageFoundation.releaseCapacity(toBeReleasedCapacity)`: Releases unused capacity (in bytes)

Reviewer: Where's `requestCapacitySync()` and `releaseCapacitySync()`?

Author: For now all functions are asynchronous and the synchronous functions have been removed.

> - `storageFoundation.releaseCapacity(toBeReleasedCapacity)`: Releases unused capacity (in bytes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `storageFoundation.releaseCapacity(toBeReleasedCapacity)`: Releases the specified number of bytes
```

Reviewer: I know that breaks your parallelism, but the grammar doesn't quite work for this definition.

>   from the current execution context. Returns a promised that resolves with the remaining amount of
>   capacity available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from the current execution context, and returns a promised that resolves with the remaining
  capacity.
```

- `storageFoundation.getRemainingCapacity()`: Returns a promise that resolves with the capacity
  available for the current execution context.

### File handles

Working with files happens via the following functions:

> {% Aside %} Storage Foundation API used to be called NativeIO. Some references to this name still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside %} The Storage Foundation API used to be called NativeIO. Some references to this name still
```

Reviewer: You should move this up so that you can correctly name the interface returned by `window.storageFoundation`.

remain and will be removed eventually. {% endAside %}

> - `NativeIOFile.close()`: Closes a file.  Returns `undefined`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `NativeIOFile.close()`: Closes a file, and returns a promise that resolves when the operation completes.
```

Reviewer: Please go through and clarify which operations return a promise.

Author: Will do, thanks for catching those!

> - `NativeIOFile.flush()`: Synchronizes (that is, flushes) a file's in-core state with the storage

Reviewer: What's an "in-core state"?

Author: One optimization of the API is that it lies: it tells you something is persisted, when actually it's only stored in memory but not on disk yet.

  device.  Returns `undefined`.

{% Aside %} It is a known issue that `flush()` might be slow and we are exploring whether offering a

> faster, less reliable variant would be useful. {% endAside %}

Reviewer: Since it returns a promise, why do I care? I don't always need to use `await`.

Author: You're in trouble when you randomly want to access previously written bytes, but these bytes weren't flushed yet.

- `NativeIOFile.getLength()`: Returns a promise that resolves with the length of the file in bytes.
- `NativeIOFile.setLength(length)`: Sets the length of the file in bytes. If the new length is
  smaller than the current length, bytes are removed starting from the end of the file. Otherwise
  the file is extended with zero-valued bytes.  Returns `undefined`.
- `NativeIOFile.read(buffer, offset)`: Reads the contents of the file at the given offset through a

>   buffer that is the result of transferring the given buffer, which is then left detached. Returns a

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow this. Are buffered file operations beyond the scope of this article? Maybe link to a discussion and call out that there's a deeper story here.

What does 'detached' mean? Does it mean that I can't write to the buffer after I've called `read()`?

Author: See the example:

```js
const readBuffer = new Uint8Array(3);
// Read at offset 1. `result.buffer` contains the transferred buffer,
// `result.readBytes` is 2, the number of bytes read. `readBuffer` is left
// detached.
result = await file.read(readBuffer, 1); 
// `Uint8Array(3) [65, 66, 0]`
```

It's a bit like an empty basket (`readBuffer`) that you take at the entrance of a store, put your groceries in, but then at the cashier your stuff gets moved to a bag (`result`) for you to take home.

  `NativeIOReadResult` with the transferred buffer and the the number of bytes that were
  successfully read.

  A `NativeIOReadResult` is an object that consists of two entries:

  - `buffer`: An

>     [`ArrayBufferView`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ArrayBufferView) which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [`ArrayBufferView`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ArrayBufferView), which is
```

    the result of transferring the buffer passed to `read()`. It is of the same type and length as
    source buffer.
  - `readBytes`: The number of bytes that were successfully read into `buffer`. This may be less
    than the buffer size, if an error occurs or if the read range spans beyond the end of the file.
    It is set to zero if the read range is beyond the end of the file.

- `NativeIOFile.write(buffer, offset)`: Writes the contents of the given buffer into the file at the
  given offset. The buffer is transferred before any data is written and is therefore left detached.
  Returns a `NativeIOWriteResult` with the transferred buffer and the number of bytes that were

>   successfully written. The file will be extended if the write range spans beyond its length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  successfully written. The file will be extended if the write range exceeds its length.
```

| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | [Started][ot]            |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

{% Aside %} There is currently an
[ongoing effort](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1g7ZCqZ5NdiU7oqyCpsc2iZ7rRAY1ZXO-9VoG4LfP7fM/edit?usp=sharing)
to augment the
[origin private file system](http://localhost:8080/file-system-access/#accessing-the-origin-private-file-system)
of the [File System Access API](/file-system-access/) as to not introduce yet another entry point
for a storage system. This article will be updated as we make progress on this. {% endAside %}

## How to use the Storage Foundation API {: #use }

### Enabling via about://flags

To experiment with the Storage Foundation API locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `about://flags`.

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

> Starting in Chromium&nbsp;90, the Storage Foundation API will be available as an origin trial in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in Chromium&nbsp;90, the Storage Foundation API is available as an origin trial in
```

  // `Uint8Array(3) [65, 66, 0]`
  console.log(result.buffer);
} finally {
  file.close();
}
```

#### Opening, listing, deleting

```js
// Open three different files (creating them if needed).
await storageFoundation.open('sunrise');
await storageFoundation.open('noon');
await storageFoundation.open('sunset');
// List all existing files.
// `["sunset", "sunrise", "noon"]`
await storageFoundation.getAll();
// Delete one of the three files.
await storageFoundation.delete('noon');
// List all remaining existing files.
// `["sunrise", "noon"]`
await storageFoundation.getAll();
```

## Demo

You can play with the [Storage Foundation API demo][demo] in the embed below. Create, rename, write
into, and read from files, and see the available capacity you have requested update as you make
changes. You can find the [source code][demo-source] of the demo on Glitch.

{% Glitch 'storage-foundation' %}

## Security and permissions

The Chromium team has designed and implemented the Storage Foundation API using the core principles
defined in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis], including user
control, transparency, and ergonomics.

> Following the same pattern as other modern storage web APIs, access to the Storage Foundation API is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the same pattern as other modern web storage APIs, access to the Storage Foundation API is
```

Author: In this case I think it's implied by the topic, and making it explicit may point people in the direction of just web storage as in [Web Storage](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API). It's all storage that happens on the web, including IDB and friends.

origin-bound, meaning that an origin may only access self-created data. It is also limited to secure
contexts.

### User control

> Storage quota will be used to distribute access to disk space and to prevent abuse. Like other

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean.

Author: Memory you want to occupy needs to be requested first.

> storage APIs, users have the option of clearing the space taken by Storage Foundation API through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
storage APIs, users can clear the space taken by Storage Foundation API through
```

{% Aside %} The Storage Foundation API achieves fast and predictable performance by implementing its
own quota management system. Web applications must explicitly ask for capacity before storing any
new data. This request will be granted according to the browser's quota guidelines. Anytime an
application starts a new JavaScript execution context (e.g., a new tab, a new worker, or when reloading the
page), it must make sure it owns sufficient capacity before writing any data. {% endAside %}

- `storageFoundation.releaseCapacity(toBeReleasedCapacity)`: Releases the specified number of bytes
  from the current execution context, and returns a promise that resolves with the remaining
  capacity.
- `storageFoundation.getRemainingCapacity()`: Returns a promise that resolves with the capacity
  available for the current execution context.

### File handles

Working with files happens via the following functions:

{% Aside %} The Storage Foundation API used to be called NativeIO. Some references to this name still
remain and will be removed eventually. {% endAside %}

- `NativeIOFile.close()`: Closes a file, and returns a promise that resolves when the operation completes.

> - `NativeIOFile.flush()`: Synchronizes (that is, flushes) a file's in-core state with the storage

Author: ```suggestion
- `NativeIOFile.flush()`: Synchronizes (that is, flushes) a file's in-memory state with the storage
```

await storageFoundation.open('noon');
await storageFoundation.open('sunset');
// List all existing files.
// `["sunset", "sunrise", "noon"]`
await storageFoundation.getAll();
// Delete one of the three files.
await storageFoundation.delete('noon');
// List all remaining existing files.
// `["sunrise", "noon"]`
await storageFoundation.getAll();
```

## Demo

You can play with the [Storage Foundation API demo][demo] in the embed below. Create, rename, write
into, and read from files, and see the available capacity you have requested update as you make
changes. You can find the [source code][demo-source] of the demo on Glitch.

{% Glitch 'storage-foundation' %}

## Security and permissions

The Chromium team has designed and implemented the Storage Foundation API using the core principles
defined in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis], including user
control, transparency, and ergonomics.

Following the same pattern as other modern storage APIs on the web, access to the Storage Foundation API is
origin-bound, meaning that an origin may only access self-created data. It is also limited to secure
contexts.

### User control

> Storage quota will be used to distribute access to disk space and to prevent abuse. Like other

Author: ```suggestion
Storage quota will be used to distribute access to disk space and to prevent abuse. Memory you want to occupy needs to be requested first. Like other
```

---
layout: post
title: 'High performance storage for your app: the Storage Foundation API'
subhead: |
  The Storage Foundation API resembles a basic file system,
  with direct access to stored data through buffers and offsets. It gives
  developers flexibility by providing generic, simple, and performant 
  primitives on which they can build higher-level components.
authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2021-06-11

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-06-15
```
